---
# Cognitive Reserve

> **Metadata**  
> Status: Medically Reviewed  
> Source: Neuropsychologia  
> Date: Unknown  

---

The concept of reserve has been proposed to account for the disjunction between the degree of brain damage or pathology and its clinical manifestations. For example, a head injury of the same magnitude can result in different levels of cognitive impairment, and that impairment can vary in its rate of recovery. Similarly, several prospective studies of aging have reported that up to 25% of elders whose neuropsychological testing is unimpaired prior to death meet full pathologic criteria for Alzheimer's disease, suggesting that this degree of pathology does not invariably result in clinical dementia. As will be described in detail below, many studies indicate that a set of life experiences such as educational and occupational exposure and leisure activities are associated with reduced risk of developing dementia and with a slower rate of memory decline in normal aging. Cognitive reserve (CR) postulates that individual differences in the cognitive processes or neural networks underlying task performance allow some people to cope better than others with brain damage. This paper attempts to produce a coherent theoretical account of reserve in general and of cognitive reserve in particular. It then reviews some of my group's epidemiologic and imaging research that has lent support to the concept of cognitive reserve and helped elucidate its neural underpinnings. It should be stressed that this review is focused on my group's work, and is not a thorough review on the entire literature on the topic.

Because my work has focused on aging and dementia, I will discuss CR's relation to these brain changes. The concept of CR, however, is applicable to almost any situation where brain function is disrupted. Thus, for example, proxies for higher CR have also been reported to mediate incidence of dementia in HIV, as well as cognitive changes associated with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and depression, and traumatic brain injury.

## Brain Reserve and Cognitive Reserve

Reserve can be roughly classified into passive and active models. Brain reserve is an example of a passive model, where reserve derives from brain size or neuronal count. Larger brains can sustain more insult before clinical deficit emerges, because sufficient neural substrate remains to support normal function. This approach to reserve has been codified in the threshold model, which revolves around the construct of “brain reserve capacity”. The model recognizes that there are individual differences in brain reserve capacity. It also presupposes that once brain reserve capacity is depleted past some fixed critical threshold specific clinical or functional deficits emerge. Thus, individual differences in brain reserve capacity lead to differences in the clinical expression of a particular degree of damage to the brain.

There are several reasons why threshold models can be termed passive models of reserve. First, this type of model assumes that there is some fixed cutoff or threshold below which functional impairment will occur for everyone. In the case of AD, this threshold might be depletion of synapses to the point where only a specific number remain. Second, threshold models are essentially quantitative models. They assume that a specific type of brain damage will have the same effect in each person, and that repeated instances of brain damage sum together. Individuals differ only in their overall brain capacity, and brain damage is either sufficient or insufficient to deplete brain reserve capacity to some critical level. Threshold models do not account for individual differences in how the brain processes cognitive or functional tasks in the face of the disruption caused by brain damage.

In contrast to passive models of reserve, active models such as CR suggest that the brain actively attempts to cope with brain damage by using pre-existing cognitive processes or by enlisting compensatory processes. Although two patients might have the same amount of brain reserve capacity, the patient with more CR may tolerate a larger lesion than the other patient before clinical impairment is apparent. Thus, an active model does not assume that there is some fixed cutoff or threshold at which functional impairment will occur. Rather it focuses on the processes that allows individuals to sustain brain damage and maintain function.

As will be discussed below, I have suggested that the possible neural implementation of cognitive reserve be subdivided into two components, neural reserve and neural compensation. Neural reserve refers to inter-individual differences in cognitive processing that exist in the normal healthy brain. Neural compensation refers to alterations in cognitive processing that may take place in order to cope with brain pathology.

### Working definitions of key concepts

Brain Reserve: Individual differences in the brain itself allow some people to cope better than others with brain pathology. These differences can be quantitative, such as larger brain, more neurons, or synapses. In addition, life experience can influence brain anatomy via neurogenesis, angiogenesis, promoting resistance to apoptosis, and up-regulating compounds that promote neural plasticity.

Cognitive Reserve: Individual differences in how people process tasks allow some to cope better than others with brain pathology.

Neural Reserve: Inter-individual variability – perhaps in the form of differing efficiency, capacity, or flexibility – in the brain networks or cognitive paradigms that underlie task performance in the healthy brain. An individual whose networks are more efficient, have greater capacity, or are more flexible might be more capable of coping with the disruption imposed by brain pathology.

Neural Compensation: Inter-individual variability in the ability to compensate for brain pathology's disruption of standard processing networks by using brain structures or networks not normally used by individuals with intact brains. This compensation may help maintain or improve performance.

It has become clearer in recent years that the demarcation between brain reserve and cognitive reserve is not clear cut. First, from a strict point of view, the differences in cognitive processing envisioned by the cognitive reserve model must also have a physiologic basis, in that the brain must ultimately mediate all cognitive function. The difference is in terms of the level of analysis. Presumably, the physiologic variability subsumed by cognitive reserve is at the level of variability in synaptic organization, or in relative utilization of specific brain regions. Thus cognitive reserve implies anatomic variability at the level of brain networks, while brain reserve implies differences in the quantity of available neural substrate. Second, many of the factors associated with increased cognitive reserve, such as cognitively stimulating experiences, have a direct effect on the brain. The child developmental literature suggests that not only do individuals with higher IQ have larger brain volume, but that cognitively stimulating aspects of life experience may also be associated with increased brain volume. It is also now clear that stimulating environments and exercise promote neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus. Both exercise and cognitive stimulation regulate factors that increase neuronal plasticity (such as BDNF) and resistance to cell death. Finally, there is evidence to suggest that environmental enrichment might act directly to prevent or slow the accumulation of AD pathology. Thus, a more complete account of CR would have to integrate these complex interactions between genetics, the environmental influences on brain reserve and pathology, and the ability to actively compensate for the effects of pathology.

## Measures of Reserve

For brain reserve, anatomic measures such as brain volume, head circumference, synaptic count, or dendritic branching are effective measures of reserve. Based on the epidemiologic evidence reviewed below, variables descriptive of lifetime experience are commonly used as proxies for CR. These include measures of socioeconomic status, such as income or occupational attainment, educational attainment and leisure activity. In some populations, degree of literacy might be a better marker for CR than number of years of formal education because it is a more direct measure of educational attainment. Finally, specific measured attributes have been used as indices of reserve, particularly IQ.

Education might also be a marker for innate intelligence, which may in turn be genetically based or a function of exposures. Some studies suggest that an estimate of IQ, or premorbid IQ might actually be a more powerful measure of reserve in some cases. Still, education and other life experiences have been shown to impart reserve over and above that obtained from innate intelligence. Studies have demonstrated separate or synergistic effects for higher educational and occupational attainment and leisure activities, suggesting that each of these life experiences contributes independently to reserve. A prospective study showed that estimated IQ at age 53 was separately influenced by childhood cognition, educational attainment and adult occupation. These observations stress that CR is not fixed; at any point in one's lifetime it results from a combination of exposures.

## Epidemiologic Evidence for CR

Figure and table references removed.

We assume that AD pathology slowly increases over time. The reserve model predicts that because there are individual differences in reserve capacity, there will be individual differences in the amount of pathology required for the initial expression of clinical symptoms and the subsequent diagnosis of disease. Note that individuals with more reserve have more AD pathology when dementia is diagnosed. Therefore, all other things being equal the disease should emerge later in people with higher CR. This leads to the prediction that the rate of incident dementia should be lower in individuals with higher cognitive reserve.

In 1994, we reported incident dementia data from a follow up study of 593 community-based, non-demented individuals aged 60 years or older. After 1 to 4 years of follow up, 106 became demented; all but five of these met research criteria for AD. The risk of dementia was increased in subjects with low education, where the relative risk (RR) of developing dementia over the follow-up period was 2.2 times higher in individuals with less than 8 years of education than in those with more education (95% confidence interval , 1.33 to 3.06). Similarly, risk of incident dementia was increased in those with low lifetime occupational attainment (RR, 2.25; 95% Cl, 1.32 to 3.84). Risk was greatest for subjects with both low education and low lifetime occupational attainment (RR, 2.87; 95% CI, 1.32 to 3.84).

To the extent that aspects of educational and occupational attainment reflect lifetime exposures that would increase CR, it would be logical to expect that environmental exposures later in life would also be beneficial. Thus, we assessed participation in a variety of leisure activities characterized as intellectual or social in a population sample of non-demented elderly in New York. During follow-up, subjects who engaged in more of these activities had 38% less risk of developing dementia. Interestingly, specific classifications of leisure activity did not provide better prediction then a simple summation of all the considered activities.

A review paper found 22 papers reporting cohort studies of the effects of education, occupation, premorbid IQ and mental activities in incident dementia published up to 2004. Ten out of 15 studies demonstrated a significant protective effect of education; 9 out of 12 a protective effect of occupational attainment; 2 out of 2 a protective effect of premorbid IQ; and 6 out of 6 a protective effect of engaging in leisure activities. Studies that did not find a protective effect had the lowest dementia rates. Integrating these studies, the authors reported that higher reserve was associated with significantly lowered risk for incident dementia. The summary odds ratio, 0.54 (95% CI, 0.49 to 0.59), indicates a decrease in risk of 46% in individuals with high reserve.

Note that this incidence approach involves implicit assumptions that the presence and rate of decline of disease pathology is independent of CR. Further, in this and most approaches to studying CR, disease pathology is not measured. It is simply inferred that reduced incidence of dementia is evidence of the effect of CR on the clinical expression of the pathology. Finally, because the diagnosis of AD relies heavily on cognitive testing, and higher education or IQ is associated with better performance on most tests, one must be careful to avoid confounding the predictors and outcomes in analyses such as these.

There is also evidence for cognitive reserve in studies of age-related cognitive decline. In an ethnically diverse cohort of nondemented elders in New York City, we found that increased literacy was associated with slower decline in memory, executive function, and language skills. Several other studies of normal aging reported slower cognitive and functional decline in individuals with higher educational attainment. These studies suggest that the same education-related factors that delay the onset of dementia also allow individuals to cope more effectively with brain changes encountered in normal aging.

In contrast to the studies reviewed above, in which greater reserve was associated with better outcomes, a series of studies of patients with AD have suggested that, once AD emerges, those with higher reserve have poorer outcomes. In a prospective study of AD patients matched for clinical severity at baseline, patients with greater education or occupational attainment died sooner than those with less attainment. We also found that higher education was associated with more rapid cognitive decline in patients with prevalent AD and subsequently replicated this observation in patients with incident AD. Similarly, we have noted more rapid decline in cognitive function in AD patients who engaged in more leisure activities prior to dementia onset. Notably, in the latter two studies cognitive decline was more rapid in patients with higher CR both immediately before and after the incidence of AD.

Although these findings might appear counterintuitive at first, their theoretical basis is illustrated in the reserve model. Because people with higher CR can tolerate more AD pathology, memory function will begin to be affected later in time, after more pathology has accumulated. Thus, the point where memory begins to decline will occur later in patients with higher CR. Another assumption is that at some point AD pathology must become too severe to support the processes that mediate either CR or memory function. The timing of this final common endpoint will be the same in all patients regardless of their level of CR. Given these two assumptions, it follows that the time between the inflection point and complete loss of function will be shorter in patients with higher CR. This leads to the prediction that memory decline after the inflection point must be more rapid in patients with higher CR. The model also indicates a point in time when dementia is diagnosed. Dementia is diagnosed later in individuals with higher CR although memory performance is of comparable severity. Thus in AD patients of comparable clinical severity, memory decline should be more rapid in those with higher CR. Because advanced AD pathology is associated with conditions that lead to death, this theoretical model can also explain more rapid time to death in AD patients with higher CR.

While this theoretical model explained our epidemiologic findings, there was no direct evidence for the model until a recent study by Hall et al. They examined memory test data collected at regular intervals from healthy elders who were followed prospectively until they became demented. They modeled the data to determine the point at which memory began to decline more rapidly. They found that the point occurred later in patients with higher education, and that the rate of memory decline after the point was more rapid in those with higher education.

## Evidence for CR From Studies of Regional Cerebral Blood Flow

Our first imaging studies of CR were designed to test the hypothesis that at any given level of clinical AD severity an individual with a higher level of CR should have greater AD pathology. In these studies, we used resting regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) as a surrogate for AD pathology. This is based on observations that specific regional rCBF changes in AD are related to the underlying AD pathology and rCBF becomes lower as the pathology advances. In AD patients matched for clinical severity, we found negative correlations between resting rCBF and years of education, such that higher education was associated with more depleted flow specifically in parietotemporal areas that are affected in AD. These findings imply that patients with higher education can tolerate more AD pathology than those with lower education and still appear clinically similar.

In a subsequent analysis of the same subjects we found a similar inverse relationship between rCBF and occupational attainment, even after controlling for educational attainment, suggesting that some aspects of occupational experiences imparted reserve over and above that obtained from education. We used data from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles to characterize occupational demands and found that two features of occupation were protective in this model. The first was interpersonal skills, which reflects the degree to which a job requires interaction with people vs. machines. The second was physical demands, which is consistent with the subsequent observations that physical exercise is beneficial for cognition. Interestingly, we originally had predicted that the substantive complexity of occupation would be the protective feature. However, this aspect of occupational demands correlated very strongly with education and, therefore, did not contribute significantly in this model. In a later O15 PET study, we replicated our initial observations and also extended the findings to leisure activities: we found an inverse relationship between rCBF and increased engagement in leisure activities, even after controlling for educational and occupational attainment. These observations have been replicated several times by other groups as well.

The implications of these imaging findings were confirmed in a prospective clinical study with subsequent neuropathological analysis. Education was found to modify the association between AD pathology assessed post mortem and levels of cognitive function proximate to death: for the same degree of brain pathology there was better cognitive function with each year of education.

## Neural Mechanisms Underlying CR

The epidemiologic and CBF at rest data provide evidence for the existence of CR. However, they cannot provide clues as to the neural mechanisms that may mediate CR. To pursue this question, my group turned to cognitive activation studies using O15 PET and fMRI.

I have suggested that the neural implementation of CR might take two forms: neural reserve and neural compensation. The idea behind neural reserve is that there is natural inter-individual variability in the brain networks or cognitive paradigms that underlie the performance of any task. This variability could be in the form of differing efficiency or capacity of these networks, or in greater flexibility in the networks that can be invoked to perform a task. While healthy individuals may invoke these networks when coping with increased task demands, the networks could also help an individual cope with brain pathology. An individual whose networks are more efficient, have greater capacity, or are more flexible might be more capable of coping with the disruption imposed by brain pathology.

Neural compensation refers to the process by which individuals suffering from brain pathology use brain structures or networks not normally used by individuals with intact brains in order to compensate for brain damage. I reserve the term neural compensation for a situation where it can be demonstrated that the more impaired group is using a different network than the unimpaired group. Distinguishing between these two possible neural implementations of CR is the necessary starting point for designing, analyzing and interpreting functional imaging studies in this area.

## Exploring the Neural Mechanisms Underlying Cognitive Reserve

Figure and table references removed.

In this section I will review the reasoning underlying the different approaches my group has taken when exploring the neural underpinnings of CR. In the next section I will review studies that demonstrate these approaches. In order to provide focus, the discussion and reviewed studies will focus on exploring CR in normal aging. For the most part, the questions to be asked in neuroimaging studies when exploring the neural basis of cognitive reserve in aging mirror those addressed in most neuroimaging studies of cognition in aging. The major addition is the focus on individual variability, and on how that variability relates to proxies for cognitive reserve such as education, IQ, occupation, and leisure activities.

It must be stressed that this scheme assumes that the neural implementation of cognitive reserve can be explored by observing similarities and differences in task-related activation. Above and beyond this scheme, it is possible that cognitive reserve may be mediated by networks that are unrelated to those typically revealed during activation studies. That is: cognitive reserve may be mediated by a generic network that is not task-specific and can be elicited during the performance of many tasks. This idea would be consistent with the concept that cognitive reserve helps maintain effective function in the face of brain pathology across a wide range of activities.

### Are the networks underlying task performance the same in young and old?

Addressing the question of whether task-related activation in two groups is the same or different is complicated by inter-related conceptual, task design and analytic issues. These reflect the fact that, for any task, a network underlying task performance can differ in its expression as a function of its efficiency or capacity. Any condition that affects brain function, including normal aging, can have an impact on network efficiency or capacity, complicating the interpretation of group or individual differences in the degree of task-related activation.

Efficiency and capacity are most readily discussed when considering task demand. For example, assume the same brain network is activated by young and old during the encoding phase of a verbal memory task. If a young and an old group are given a 5-word memory task, this task might be trivial for the young subjects, but demanding for the older subjects. That is, the network might be more efficient in the younger subjects such that less activation of the network might be associated with similar or superior performance to that seen in the older group. Thus, for this simple task, greater activation might be seen in old people than in young people. Conversely, a network might have greater capacity in the younger group; that is, it is capable of activating to a greater degree in the young than the old subjects under conditions of greater demand. Thus, in a 20-word memory task, greater activation might be seen in the young subjects than in the old. Because of these considerations, different levels of task-related activation across groups in and of itself is very difficult to interpret.

Imaging investigators typically attempt to account for these considerations in their study design. Often investigators will attempt to match task performance in the young and old groups. This might be done through careful subject selection, or by manipulating the task demands themselves so that subjects perform at a comparable level. However, this approach does not really solve the problem. First, even with the most careful matching procedures, it is probably not truly possible to ensure comparable performance in each subject or group; groups might be matched on one measure, such as performance accuracy, but still differ on another, such as reaction time. Second, matching on performance across groups or individuals does not really account for possible mismatches in the underlying efficiency or capacity of the networks mediating that performance. Because of these considerations, my group has begun to use tasks where task demand can be parametrically varied within each subject. This allows one to observe how task-related activation changes over a range of task difficulty, and to compare these demand/activation functions in young and old subjects.

Image analysis approaches must also be adjusted to take these efficiency capacity issues into account. Voxel-based analyses of imaging data as traditionally applied are not sufficient to discriminate between situations where the neural network underlying task performance differs in two groups and those where the network is actually the same but is operating at different efficiency and capacity. One solution to this problem is to use analytic approaches that investigate spatial covariance patterns as opposed to comparing groups on a voxel-by-voxel basis. With appropriate study designs, voxel-based analyses can also address these issues. One possible approach is to examine how task-related activation relates to some other variable, such as performance or CR. If the relationship differs in young and old individuals, then one can reasonably conclude that there is some difference in how these areas mediate performance in the two groups.

In summary, a key step in exploring the neural basis of cognitive reserve is to determine whether the old and young groups use the same or different networks during task performance. Two techniques that could be useful in avoiding the inherent complications in comparing young and old are parametric control of task demand and the use of spatial covariance rather than voxel-based analyses. If the two groups use the same network, then the next step might be to explore whether this network differs across the groups in its efficiency or capacity.

### Efficiency, Capacity and CR

The idea that network efficiency or capacity might be related to cognitive reserve stems directly from the concept of neural reserve. The concept of neural reserve is that inter-individual variability in the brain networks that underlie task performance of a healthy brain might make some people more capable than others of coping with the destruction imposed by brain pathology. One straightforward way that these individual differences could be expressed would be in the form of differential efficiency or capacity. Therefore, even in young healthy individuals without any age- or AD-related pathology, differences in network efficiency and capacity might be identified, and these differences might be associated with proxies for CR. Such an association would suggest that neural reserve is mediated in part by differential network efficiency and capacity.

A testable working hypothesis is that a person with higher CR will show patterns of task-related activation that are more efficient and have higher capacity. A straightforward measure of efficiency is the amount of task-related activation as a function of performance or task load. A more efficient network will show less activation in order to produce the same or better level of performance. Capacity might be characterized by the ability to activate a network at high load levels. We have focused on efficiency and capacity because these concepts are relatively straightforward to address using functional imaging.

### Do elders who use the alternate network to a greater degree perform better?

If we determine that the networks underlying task performance differ in young and old, we are in a position to address the concept of neural compensation. When two groups process a task differently, the differentiation can take many forms. The older group could use a completely different set of brain areas than the younger group. Alternately, the older group might continue to use the same brain areas, but the relationship between activation in these areas could be reorganized. Finally, the older group could continue to use the same areas as the unimpaired group, but also recruit some new areas not used by the younger group.

The definition of neural compensation requires that differences between young and old subjects exist. There are at least two ways that compensation may manifest itself. The most straightforward form of compensation occurs when greater use of the alternate network by elders is associated with better performance. In this situation, we can hypothesize that this alternate network has been recruited to compensate for age-related neural changes, and that those capable of recruiting it to a greater degree are coping better with these changes. While this form of compensation has been observed in many studies, other forms of compensation are clearly possible. Compensation to maintain performance can occur when elders recruit compensatory networks not used by young subjects and perform more poorly than younger subjects. Another related scenario is that elders who recruit compensatory networks perform more poorly than elders who do not recruit these networks. Such a situation could occur when age-related changes affect the typical network used by younger individuals and an alternate network is recruited that supports continued performance but is not as optimal as the primary network.

The concept of compensation to maintain performance must be pitted against that of dedifferentiation. Dedifferentiation suggests that regional processing specification decreases with aging due to increased levels of noise or decreased levels of functional integration. When individuals who are performing more poorly activate areas that better performers do not, dedifferentiation is a reasonable explanation. There is no simple solution to resolving this question. A more empirical approach requires operationalizing key concepts in order to develop testable questions. If an alternate network is used to compensate for the effects of age-related changes on the primary network, it may be possible to quantify these age-related changes using proxy measures such as atrophy or white matter hyperintensities. One would then predict that individuals with greater atrophy would be more likely to use the alternate network. Techniques such as transcranial magnetic stimulation will be helpful in testing these ideas by allowing direct manipulation of brain areas or networks. Such analyses will require complex integration of multiple modalities.

## Review of Imaging Studies

Table references removed.

In this section, I will review studies conducted by my group that address the questions and apply the approaches discussed above. These studies were not designed to definitively identify the neural substrates of CR. The goals are more limited. First, we wanted to develop methodology to address some of the difficulties in studying CR discussed above. Second, we wanted to explore techniques for supporting the concepts of neural reserve and neural compensation.

### Imaging Study Methods

#### Subjects

All papers described in this review studied healthy young and elderly adults. Young participants were typically ages 20-35, and elders typically ages 60-85. All subjects were right handed, and carefully screened for medical or psychiatric conditions or medications that could influence task performance or the imaging measures. Elders were carefully screened to rule out dementia or mild cognitive impairment.

#### Activation Tasks

We used two types of activation tasks. Both were chosen to address the issues related to task difficulty discussed above. In both cases the strategy is to examine the change in activation as task becomes more difficult. This allows us to explore issues of efficiency and capacity. Evaluating neural responses to increased task demand has intuitive appeal, since CR is expected to be associated with the ability to cope with this demand.

##### Nonverbal serial recognition task

This was our first attempt to implement a task that dealt with the possibility of differential task difficulty in young and old. The task consists of the serial presentation of a set of shapes designed to be difficult to verbally encode, followed by a series of the same number of recognition probes. For each probe, the subject uses a button press to indicate whether or not they had just seen the item. There are two task conditions. In the low demand condition, each study item is followed by a recognition probe. In the titrated demand condition, subjects study a longer list of items, and then respond to an equally long set of recognition probes. Prior to scanning, the study list size of the titrated demand condition is adjusted for each subject, such that recognition accuracy was 75%. We examine the change in task-related activation from the low to the titrated demand condition. The titration procedure was intended to match task difficulty as operationalized by recognition accuracy across subjects. Our reasoning was that once task difficulty is equated across individuals old and young subjects, any differences in task-related activation would not be a function of differential task difficulty but would capture true alterations in how the task is processed.

##### Letter and Shape Sternberg Task

We selected this task because it has three conditions that systematically vary task demand or load within each subject. The task is based on one published originally by Rypma, et al. In the verbal version of this task, subjects study 1, 3, or 6 letters for 3 seconds followed by a 7 second retention period. They are then presented with a single probe letter and are asked to indicate whether that letter is a member of the previously studied set. In the shape version of the task, 1, 2, or 3 shapes designed to be difficult to verbally encode are presented at the encoding phase and a single shape is presented at probe. One straightforward behavioral measure taken from both of these tasks is the increase in reaction time associated with making a decision as set size increases. This slope of the reaction time over set size is considered to be a measure of working memory scanning speed. The primary aspect of fMRI data that we examined was aspects of task-related activation that changed systematically as set size increased.

#### Analytic Approaches

##### General Linear Model

This is a relatively standard, voxel-based approach implemented in SPM. In the analyses described here, the primary use of the GLM approach is to examine how change in task-related activation across task load is related to measures of CR.

##### Multivariate Linear Model

This is a covariance analytic approach that can address the inherent problems with voxel-based comparisons. Instead of looking for significant activation at each voxel using standard statistical thresholds, this approach attempts to identify spatial patterns of covarying task-related activation across the entire brain. It can then test whether these patterns are similar or different across groups. If only one significant pattern is found, this indicates that both groups are using the same pattern. If two patterns are found, the first pattern generally represents aspects of task-related activation that are common to the two groups, and the second pattern consists of aspects of activation that differ between the two groups. Each subject's expression of spatial patterns can be quantified, and can be related to aspects of task performance.

##### Ordinal Trend Canonical Variates Analysis

This is another form of covariance analysis that is applied to task designs where there are systematic changes in task demand across conditions. This analysis attempts to identify a covariance pattern whose expression increases as task load increases for as many individual subjects as possible. Each subject's expression of a covariance pattern can be quantified and related to aspects of task performance.

## Conclusions

There is strong epidemiologic evidence for the idea that cognitive reserve mediates between brain changes or pathology and the clinical manifestation of that pathology. The concept of cognitive reserve strongly relies on the idea that there can be individual differences in how tasks are processed that can allow some people to cope better than others with brain changes in general and aging in particular. I have tried to map out a systematic approach for exploring the neural implementation of CR. I do not view the studies presented here as definitively identifying the neural substrates of CR. Rather, they help to establish methodologies for exploring these neural substrates. These approaches acknowledge that reserve may be mediated in many different ways, and the results presented here can be seen as supporting the suppositions presented above about how CR might be neurally mediated. Neural reserve recognizes that old and young individuals may use the same networks to mediate task performance, albeit with different levels of efficiency and capacity. This inter-individual variability is present even within these two groups, and differences in neural reserve may be one mechanism underlying CR. On the other hand, there are clearly situations where older individuals adopt networks that are not used by younger subjects, presumably in response to age-related neural changes. These alternate networks may represent neural compensation. The degree of compensation can again vary across individuals in its expression and success. Evaluating neural compensation in imaging studies is often hampered by the difficulty of measuring the underlying brain changes that induce this compensation. Simply relating degree of expression of compensatory activation to performance is not sufficient. Compensatory activation can be accompanied by both better and poorer performance. In either case CR might also be mediated in part via neural compensation.

Finally, CR may not be solely mediated via variability in the expression of the specific brain networks associated with the task at hand; there may be one or more general, reserve-related networks whose expressions are associated with CR across many different tasks. This translates into the question of whether CR is task-specific or represents some generalized cognitive function that is associated with the performance of multiple tasks. The epidemiologic evidence suggests that a set of lifetime exposures translates into a cognitive reserve that mediates the brain changes associated with aging or AD. This makes it attractive to speculate that a general reserve-related network may be identified.

Determining whether or not there is a generalized CR network is important for considering whether it will be possible to intervene to impart increased CR and thereby slow the effects of advancing age or AD pathology. Research to date suggests that cognitive training benefits only the task used in training itself and does not generalize to other tasks or behaviors. Better understanding of the neural mediation of CR may provide suggestions for targets and approaches for increasing CR and improving performance across a wider range of tasks.

The possibility of using an imaging approach to measure CR could also have other practical implications. Imaging could be used as a meaningful outcome in cognitive interventions. Imaging CR would also be very useful for understanding any aged individual's true clinical status, which would be a combination of underlying age-related or Alzheimer's disease-related brain changes and that individuals' CR in the face of those changes. Two individuals who appear the same clinically could differ widely on these underlying measures. This approach to characterizing clinical severity would have strong implications for prognosis and treatment.

The concept of CR first emerged from epidemiologic observations. The desire to understand the neural basis of CR has been a motivating factor for functional imaging studies that may contribute to our understanding of the brain-behavior changes that occur with aging. Finally, studies of CR may point the way to successful interventions that can help maintain successful aging and slow the onset of dementia. Similar applications of the concept of CR to other types of brain pathology have begun to yield similar fruit. While CR is an intuitively attractive concept, its application to applied research requires theoretical and methodologic consideration. With the proper research designs, the concept of CR provides a frame for generating powerful and empirically testable research ideas.
---